
=== PAGE 1 ===
Pollution characteristics, ecological risk and microbial response to 
combined heavy metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
soil-groundwater system of the blown-sand region
Xiaobang Liu a,b, Lei Duan a,b
, Yaqiao Sun a,b,*, Chenchen Xie a,b, Guobin Song a,b
a School of Water and Environment, Chang’an University, Xi’an 710054, Shaanxi, China
b Key Laboratory of Underground Hydrology and Ecological Effects in Arid Regions of the Ministry of Education, Chang’an University, Xi’an 710054, Shaanxi, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Soil-groundwater system
Multi-pollutants
Pollution prevention
Empirical Bayesian kriging (EBK) model
Microbial stress
A B S T R A C T
Systematic revelation on the interaction relationships and environmental behavior of composite pollutants in 
soil-groundwater systems is essential but still paucity. This paper integrated geochemistry, statistical analysis and 
microbiology to progressively analyze the pollution characteristics of heavy metals (HMs) and polycyclic aro­
matic hydrocarbons (PAHs), potential ecological risks and microbial response mechanisms in the blown-sand 
region. The results indicate that the soil was compound-contaminated by HMs and PAHs. HMs primarily accu­
mulated in the soil of 1~1.5 m, while PAHs were predominantly found in 0~0.5 m. Although HMs and PAHs 
showed different sources, the spatial distribution of co-pollutants exhibited a marked correlation with the in­
dustrial layout. The ecological risk in the soil was at a low level, and its spatial distribution corresponded to the 
pollutants. The microbial community in soil and groundwater exhibited significant distress due to pollutants, as 
evidenced by disparities in OTU abundance, diversity index, and microbial community composition. The natural 
attenuation, encompassing aerobic biodegradation, photodegradation, chemical oxidation and volatilization, 
plays an important role in controlling the environmental behavior of HMs and PAHs in the blown-sand areas. 
Based on the above analysis, a technical framework was proposed to prevent and remediate soil-groundwater 
pollution using sensitive microorganisms and tolerant microorganisms. This paper initially combines compos­
ite pollutants and microbial community response and highlights the systematic research in the prevention and 
remediation of soil-groundwater pollution.
1. Introduction
Accelerated urbanization and strategic industrial restructuring drive 
the spatial clustering of industrial activities. Consequently, soil- 
groundwater pollution caused by industrial parks is characterized by 
localized hotspots, high concentrations and multiple pollutants (Peng 
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023). Among them, heavy metals (HMs) and 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are of significant concern due 
to their high toxicity, bioaccumulation, and adverse effects on human 
tissue (Li et al., 2024b; You et al., 2024). Despite their divergent 
anthropogenic origins, HMs and PAHs frequently exhibit spatially 
overlapping contamination patterns and have been detected in multiple 
environmental compartments, such as indoor combustion (Fappiano 
et al., 2024), urban soil (Amjadian et al., 2016), farmland soils (Xie 
et al., 2024), street dust (Saeedi et al., 2012), contaminated sites (You 
et al., 2024), and others (Wu et al., 2024). It is well-known that pol­
lutants in soil frequently engage in interactions that can be synergistic, 
antagonistic, or additive (Ashkanani et al., 2024). These processes not 
only alter contaminant toxicity but also make their environmental 
behavior more complex (Anjum et al., 2024; Jiang and Zhao, 2024). 
Therefore, numerous studies have been conducted to investigate the 
prevention, control and remediation technologies of combined HMs and 
PAHs pollution (Wu et al., 2022; Zhao, 2023).
Identifying contaminant distribution characteristics and pollution 
levels is fundamental to deploying effective pollution prevention and 
remediation strategies. Most recently, numerous research methods such 
as multivariate statistics, geostatistics (Ma et al., 2025), chemical mass 
balance (CMB) (Li et al., 2014a), and pollution index (Jin et al., 2021) 
were used to analyze soil-groundwater contaminant levels. The inves­
tigation revealed that the soil contamination is a complex, multifaceted 
* Corresponding author. School of Water and Environment, Chang’an University, Xi’an 710054, Shaanxi, China.
E-mail address: sunyaqiao@chd.edu.cn (Y. Sun). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Environmental Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envres
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2025.122748
Received 1 May 2025; Received in revised form 31 August 2025; Accepted 1 September 2025  
Environmental Research 286 (2025) 122748 
Available online 2 September 2025 
0013-9351/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
