                                                                           Journal of Hazardous Materials 430 (2022) 128301

                                                                        Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

                                   Journal of Hazardous Materials

                                                             journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat

Research Paper

Remarkable enrichment of heavy metals in baghouse filter dust during
direct-fired thermal desorption of contaminated soil

Panpan Wang a,b, Yunzhe Cao c,*, Huilong Luo a,b, Ting Li d, Bin Yang c, Huiying Li c,
Tian Liang a,b, Jingjing Yu a,b, Lina Wang a,e, Fujun Ma a, Qingbao Gu a, Aizhong Ding b,
Fasheng Li a,b,**

a State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing 100012, China
b College of Water Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
c Technical Centre for Soil, Agriculture and Rural Ecology and Environment, Ministry of Ecology and Environment, Beijing 100012, China
d Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology, CNNC, Beijing 100029, China
e School of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Beijing 100083, China

HIGHLIGHTS                                 GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT

· Baghouse filter dust is obviously
  enriched in heavy metals.

· The speciation of seven heavy metals
  changed significantly.

· Cr and Ni aggregation was observed
  during thermal desorption.

· Appropriate disposal of baghouse filter
  dust is discussed.

ARTICLE INFO                               ABSTRACT

Editor: Dr. B. Lee                         This study focuses on the widely applied technology of direct-fired thermal desorption, taking a site contami
                                           nated by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) as a typical test case. The entire thermal desorption process of
Keywords:                                  contaminated soil is considered in the analysis. The concentration levels and occurrence characteristics of heavy
Heavy metal                                metals in dust traditionally considered to be clean are evaluated, and possible secondary pollution and envi
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)      ronmental impacts are explored. The results indicate that, compared with the thermal desorption soil, the dust
contaminated site                          samples generated in the baghouse filter during the ex situ direct-fired thermal desorption process have higher
Thermal desorption                         amounts of heavy metal accumulation as well as altered speciation. In addition, the enrichment characteristics
Safe soil reuse                            and origins of the heavy metals are analyzed according to the process flow and particle size composition as well
                                           as the results of X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy
                                           (EDS), electron probe microanalysis (EPMA), and other microscopic research methods. Phenomenon further
                                           reveals enrichment of arsenic (As), nickel (Ni), and chromium (Cr). The findings of this study can provide a
                                           scientific basis for the proper disposal and risk management of the dust collected after direct-fired thermal
                                           desorption treatment of contaminated soil.

  * Corresponding author.
 ** Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing
100012, China.

     E-mail addresses: caoyunzhe@tcare-mee.cn (Y. Cao), lifs@craes.org.cn (F. Li).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.128301
Received 7 November 2021; Received in revised form 31 December 2021; Accepted 16 January 2022
Available online 22 January 2022
0304-3894/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
